Project Gutenberg's The Philosophy of Despair, by David Starr Jordan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Philosophy of Despair

Author: David Starr Jordan

Posting Date: September 4, 2009 [EBook #4754]
Release Date: December, 2003
First Posted: March 12, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESPAIR ***




Produced by David A. Schwan.  HTML version by Al Haines.









The Philosophy of Despair



by

David Starr Jordan




  To
  John Maxson Stillman
  In Token of Good Cheer




  A darkening sky and a whitening sea,
  And the wind in the palm trees tall;
  Soon or late comes a call for me,
  Down from the mountain or up from the sea,
  Then let me lie where I fall.

  And a friend may write--for friends there be,
  On a stone from the gray sea wall,
  "Jungle and town and reef and sea--
  I loved God's Earth and His Earth loved me,
  Taken for all in all."



Today is your day and mine, the only day we have, the day in which we
play our part. What our part may signify in the great whole, we may not
understand, but we are here to play it, and now is our time. This we
know, it is a part of action, not of whining. It is a part of love, not
cynicism. It is for us to express love in terms of human helpfulness.
This we know, for we have learned from sad experience that any other
course of life leads toward decay and waste.




The Philosophy of Despair



The Bubbles of Sáki.


From Fitzgerald's exquisite version of the Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám, I
take the following quatrains which may serve as a text for what I have
to say:

  So when the angel of the darker Drink
  At last shall find you by the river-brink,
  And offering you his cup, invite your Soul
  Forth to your lips to quaff, you shall not shrink.

  Why, if the soul can fling the Dust aside,
  And naked on the air of Heaven ride,
  Wert not a shame--wert not a shame for him
  In this clay carcase crippled to abide?

  'Tis but a tent where takes his one-day's rest
  A Sultan to the realm of Death addrest;
  The Sultan rises, and the dark Ferrásh
  Strikes, and prepares it for another guest.

  And fear not lest Existence, closing your
  Account, and mine, shall know the like no more;
  The Eternal Sáki from that bowl hath pour'd
  Millions of bubbles like us, and will pour.

  When you and I behind the veil are past,
  Oh, but the long, long while the world shall last,
  Which of our coming and departure heeds
  As the Sev'n Seas shall heed a pebble-cast.

  A moment's halt--a momentary taste
  Of Being from the Well amid the waste,
  And lo!--the phantom caravan has reach'd
  The Nothing it set out from--O, make haste!

  * * *

  There was the door to which I found no key;
  There was the veil through which I could not see:
  Some little talk awhile of Me and Thee
  There was--and then no more of Thee and Me.

  * * *

  Why, all the Saints and Sages who discuss'd
  Of the two worlds so learnedly are thrust
  Like foolish prophets forth; their words to scorn
  Are scatter'd and their mouths are stopt with dust.

  With them the seed of wisdom did I sow,
  And with my own hand wrought to make it grow
  And this was all the harvest that I reap'd--
  "I come like water, and like wind I go."

  * * *

  Ah Love, could thou and I with Him conspire
  To grasp this sorry scheme of Things entire,
  Would we not shatter it to bits--and then
  Re-mould it nearer to the heart's desire!

  Yon rising Moon that looks for us again--
  How oft hereafter will she wax and wane;
  How oft hereafter rising look for us
  Through this same garden--and for one in vain!

  And when like her, O Sáki, you shall pass
  Among the guests, star-scattered on the grass,
  And in your blissful errand reach the spot
  Where I made one--turn down an empty glass!

  * * *

And, again, in another poem from Carmen Silva's Roumanian folk-songs:

  Hopeless.

  Into the mist I gazed, and fear came on me,
  Then said the mist: "I weep for the lost sun."

  We sat beneath our tent;
  Then he that hath no hope drew near us there,
  And sat him down by us.
  We asked him: "Hast thou seen the plains, the mountains?"
  And he made answer: "I have seen them all."
  And then his cloak he showed us, and his shirt,
  Torn was the shirt, there, close above the heart,
  Pierced was the breast, there, close above the heart--
  The heart was gone.
  And yet he trembled not, the while we looked,
  And sought the heart, the heart that was not there.
  He let us look. And he that had no hope
  Smiled, that we grew so pale, and sang us songs.
  Then we did envy him, that he could sing
  Without a heart to suffer what he sang.
  And when he went, he cast his cloak about him,
  And those that met him, they could never guess
  How that his shirt was torn about the heart,
  And that his breast was pierced above the heart,
  And that the heart was gone.

  I gazed into the mist, and fear came on me,
  Then said the mist: "I weep for the lost sun."

This poem of Omar and of Fitzgerald is perhaps our best expression of
the sadness and the grandeur of insoluble problems. It is the sweetness
of philosophical sorrow which has no kinship with misery or distress. In
the strains of the saddest music the soul finds the keenest delight. The
same sweet, sorrowful pleasure is felt in the play of the mind about the
riddles which it cannot solve.

In the presence of the infinite problem of life, the voice of Science is
dumb, for Science is the coördinate and corrected expression of human
experience, and human experience must stop with the limitations of human
life. Man was not present "When the foundations of the Earth were laid,"
and beyond the certainty that they were laid in wisdom and power, man
can say little about them. Man finds in the economy of nature "no trace
of a beginning; no prospect of an end!" He may feel sure, with Hutton,
that "time is as long as space is wide." But he cannot conceive of space
as actually without limit, nor can he imagine any limiting conditions.
He cannot think of a period before time began, nor of a state in which
time shall be no more. The mind fails before the idea of time's eternal
continuity. So time becomes to man merely the sequence of the earthly
events in which he and his ancestors have taken part. Even thus limited
it is sadly immortal, while man's stay on the earth is but of "few days
and full of trouble." "Oh, but the long, long while this world shall
last!" or as the grim humorist puts it, "we shall be a long time dead."

Though the meaning of time, space, existence lies beyond our reach, yet
some sort of solution of the infinite problem the human heart demands.
We find in life a power for action, limited though this power may be.
Life is action, and action is impossible if devoid of motive or hope.

It is my purpose here to indicate some part of the answer of Science to
the Philosophy of Despair. Direct reply Science has none. We cannot
argue against a singer or a poet. The poet sings of what he feels, but
Science speaks only of what we know. We feel infinity, but we cannot
know it, for to the highest human wisdom the ultimate truths of the
universe are no nearer than to the child. Science knows no ultimate
truths. These are beyond the reach of man, and all that man knows must
be stated in terms of his experience. But as to human experience and
conduct, Science has a word to say.

Therefore Science can speak of the causes and results of Pessimism. It
can touch the practical side of the riddle of life by asking certain
questions, the answers to which lie within the province of human
experience. Among these are the following:

Why is there a "Philosophy of Despair?"

Can Despair be wrought into healthful life?

In what part of the Universe are you and what are you doing?

Personal despair or discouragement may rise from failure of strength or
failure of plans. This is a matter of every-day occurrence. The "best
laid schemes o' mice and men" generally go wrong, no doubt, but this
fact has little to do with the Philosophy of Pessimism. It is natural
for mice and men to try again and to gain wisdom from failures. "By the
embers of loss we count our gains."

The Pessimism of Youth we may first consider: In the transition from
childhood to manhood great changes take place in the nervous system.
There is for a time a period of confusion, in which the nerve cells are
acquiring new powers and new relations. This is followed by a time of
joy and exuberance, a sense of a new life in a new world, a feeling of
new power and adequacy, the thought that life is richer and better worth
living than the child could have supposed.

To this in turn comes a feeling of reaction. The joys of life have been
a thousand times felt before they come to us. We are but following part
of a cut-and-dried program, "performing actions and reciting speeches
made up for us centuries before we were born." The new power of manhood
and womanhood which seemed so wonderful find their close limitations. As
our own part in the Universe seems to shrink as we take our place in it,
so does the Universe itself seem to grow small, hard and unsympathetic.
Very few young men or young women of strength and feeling fail to pass
through a period of Pessimism. With some it is merely an affectation
caught from the cheap literature of decadence. It then may find
expression in imitation, as a few years ago the sad-hearted youth turned
down his collar in sympathy with the "conspicuous loneliness" that took
the starch out of the collar of Byron. "The youth," says Zangwill,
"says bitter things about Life which Life would have winced to hear had
it been alive." With others Pessimism has deeper roots and finds its
expression in the poetry or philosophy of real despair.

This adolescent Pessimism cannot be wrought into action. The mood
disappears when real action is demanded. The Pessimism of youth vanishes
with the coming of life. Through the rush of the new century, the fad of
the drooping spirit has already given way to the fad of the strenuous
life. Equally unreasoning it may be, but far more wholesome.

But if action is impossible, the mood remains. And here arises the
despair of the highly educated. The purpose of knowledge is action. But
to refuse action is to secure time for the acquisition of more
knowledge. It is written in the very structure of the brain that each
impression of the senses must bring with it the impulse to act. To
resist this impulse is in turn to destroy it and to substitute a dull
soul-ache in its place. "Much study is a weariness of the flesh, and the
experience of all the ages brings only despair if it cannot be wrought
into life. This lack of balance between knowledge and achievement is the
main element in a form of ineffectiveness which with various others has
been uncritically called Degeneration. As the common pleasures which
arise from active life become impossible or distasteful, the desire for
more intense and novel joys comes in, and with the goading of the thirst
for these comes ever deeper discouragement.

At the best, the tendency of large knowledge, not vitalized by practical
experience, is to spend itself in cynical criticism, in futile efforts
to tear down without feeling the higher obligation to build up. For it
is the essence of this form of Pessimism to feel that there is nothing
on earth worth the trouble of building. The real is only a "sneering
comment" on the ideal, and man's life is too short to make any action
worth while.

  "With her the seed of Wisdom did I sow,
  And with mine own hands wrought to make it grow;
  And this is all the harvest that I reap'd,
  'I come like water, and like wind I go.'"

One of the few things that we may know in life is this, that it is
impossible for man to know anything absolutely. The power of reasoning
is a mere "by-product in the process of Evolution." It is but an
instrument to help out the confusion of the senses, and it is
conditioned by the accuracy of the sense-perceptions with which it
deals. There is no appeal from experience to reason, for reason is
powerless to act save on the facts of human experience. Speculative
philosophy can teach us nothing. The senses and the reason are intensely
practical and all, our faculties are primarily adapted to immediate
purposes. Instruments such as these cannot serve to probe the nature of
the infinite. But no other instruments lie within reach of man. If we
cannot "reach the heart of reality" by reason, what indeed can we reach?
What right have we to know or to believe? And if we can know or believe
nothing, what should we try to do? And how indeed can we do anything?
Every man's fate is determined by his heredity and his environment. In
the Arab proverb he is born with his fate bound to his neck. In the
course of life we must do that which has been already cut out for us.
Our parts were laid for us long before we appeared to take them. He is
indeed a strong man who can vary the cast or give a different cue to
those who follow. Nature is no respecter of persons, and to suppose that
any man is in any degree "the arbiter of his own destiny" is pure
illusion. We are thrust forth into life, against our will. Against our
will we are forced to leave it. We find ourselves, as has been said, "on
a steep incline, where we can veer but little to the left or right";
whichever way we move we fall finally to the very bottom. The fires we
kindle die away in coals; castles we build vanish before our eyes. The
river sinks in the sands of the desert. The character we form by our
efforts disintegrates in spite of our effort. If life be spared we find
ourselves once again helpless children. Whichever way we turn we may
describe the course of life in metaphors of discouragement.

To the pessimistic philosopher the progress of the race is also mere
illusion. There is no progress, only adaptation. Every creature must fit
itself to its environment or pass away. The beast fits the forest for
the same reason that the river fits its bed. Life is only possible under
the rare conditions in which life is not destroyed.

In such fashion we may ring the changes of the despair of philosophy. If
we are to take up the threads of life by the farther end only, we shall
never begin to live, for only those which lie next us can ever be in our
hand. To grasp at ultimate truth is to be forever empty-handed. To reach
for the ultimate end of action is never to begin to act.

Deeper and more worthy of respect is the sadness of science. The effort
"to see things as they really are," to get out of all make-believe and
to secure that "absolute veracity of thought" without which sound action
is impossible does not always lead to hopefulness.

There is much to discourage in human history,--in the facts of human
life. The common man, after all the ages, is still very common. He is
ignorant, reckless, unjust, selfish, easily misled. All public affairs
bear the stamp of his weakness. Especially is this shown in the
prevalence of destructive strife. The boasted progress of civilization
is dissolved in the barbarism of war. Whether glory or conquest or
commercial greed be war's purpose, the ultimate result of war is death.
Its essential feature is the slaughter of the young, the brave, the
ambitious, the hopeful, leaving the weak, the sickly, the discouraged to
perpetuate the race. Thus all militant, nations become decadent ones.
Thus the glory of Rome, her conquests and her splendor of achievement,
left the Romans at home a nation of cowards, and such they are to this
day. For those who survive are not the sons of the Romans, but of the
slaves, scullions, the idlers and camp-followers whom the years of Roman
glory could not use and did not destroy. War blasts and withers all that
is worthy in the works of man.

That there seems no way out of this is the cause of the sullen despair
of so many scholars of Continental Europe. The millennium is not in
sight. It is farther away than fifty years ago. The future is narrowing
down and men do not care to forecast it. It is enough to grasp what we
may of the present. We hear "the ring of the hammer on the scaffold."
"Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die." "The sad kings," in
Watson's phrase, can only pile up fuel for their own destruction, and
the failure of force will release the unholy brood which force has
caused to develop. The winds of freedom are tainted by sulphurous
exhalations. In all our merry-making we find with Ibsen that "there is a
corpse on board." The mask is falling only to show the Death's head
there concealed. Aristocracy, Democracy, Anarchy, Empire, the history of
politics, is the eternal round of the Dance of Death.

When we look at human nature in detail we find more of animal than of
angel, and the "veracity of thought and action," which is the choicest
gift of Science, is lost in the happy-go-lucky movement of the human
mob. "To see things as they really are" is the purpose of the philosophy
of Pessimism in the hands of its worthiest exponents. But we know what
is, and that alone, even were such knowledge possible, is not to know
the truth. The higher wisdom seeks to find the forces at work to produce
that which now is. The present time is the meeting time of forces; the
present fact their temporary product. To the philosophy of Evolution,
"every meanest day is the conflux of two eternities." Each meanest fact
is the product of the world-forces that lie behind it; each meanest man
the resultant of the vast powers, alive in human nature, struggling
since life began. And these forces, omnipotent and eternal, will never
cease their work.

To the philosophy of Pessimism, the child is a mere human larva, weak,
perverse, disagreeable, the heir of mortality, with all manner of
"defects of doubt and taints of blood," gathered in the long experience
of its wretched parentage.

In the more hopeful view of Evolution the child exists for its
possibilities. The huge forces within have thrown it to the surface of
time. They will push it onward to development, which may not be much in
the individual case, but beyond it all lie the possibilities of its
race. Inherent in it is the power to rise, to form its own environment,
to stand at last superior to the blind forces by which the human will
was made. With this thought is sure to come, in some degree, the
certainty that the heart of the Universe is sound, that though there be
so many of us in the world, each must have his place, and each at last
"be somehow needful to infinity." We can see that each least creature
has its need for being. The present justifies the past. It is the
transcendent future which renders the commonplace present possible.

  The "dragons of the prime,
  That tore each other in the slime,"

lived and fought that we their descendants may realize ourselves in
"lives made beautiful and sweet," through all unlikeness to dragons. It
was necessary that every foot of soil in Europe should be crimsoned by
blood, wantonly shed, to bring the relative peace and tolerance of the
civilization of Europe today. It always "needs that offense must come"
to bring about the better condition in which each particular offense
shall be done away. For the evolution of life is not in straight lines
from lower to higher things, but runs rather in wavering spirals. It is
the resultant of stress and storm. The evil and failure which darken the
present are necessary to the illumination of the future. Time is long.
"God tosses back to man his failures" one by one, and gives him time and
strength to try again.

According to Schopenhauer, we move across the stage of life stung by
appetite and goaded by desire, in pain unceasing, the sole respite from
pain, the instant in which desire is lost in satisfaction. To do away
with desire is to destroy pain, but it also destroys existence. Desire
is lost where the "mouth is stopped with dust," and with death only
comes relief from pain.

Thus the Pessimist tells us that "the only reality in life is pain." But
surely this is not the truth. He who knows no reality save appetite has
never known life at all. The realities in life are love and action; not
desire, but the exercise of our appointed functions.

Action follows sensation. The more we have to do the more accurate must
be our sensations, the greater the hold environment has upon us. Broader
activities demand better knowledge of our surroundings. Greater
sensitiveness to external things means greater capacity for pain, hence
greater suffering, when the natural channels of effort are closed. Thus
arises the hope for nothingness in which many sensitive souls have
indulged. With no surroundings at all, or with environment that never
varies, there could be no sense-perception. To see nothing, to feel
nothing--there could be no demand for action. With no failure of action
there could be no weariness. From the varied environment of earthly life
spring, through adaptation, the varied powers and varied sensibilities,
susceptibilities to joy and pain as well as the rest. The greater the
sensitiveness the greater the capacity for suffering. Hence the
"quenching of desire," the "turning toward Nirvana, the desire to
escape from the hideous bustle of a world in which we are able to take
no part, is a natural impulse with the soul which feels but cannot or
will not act.

  "Can it be, O Christ in Heaven,
  That the highest suffer most,
  That the strongest wander farthest
  And most hopelessly are lost?--

  That the mark of rank in Nature
  Is capacity for pain,
  And the anguish of the singer
  Marks the sweetness of the strain?

That this must be so rests in the very nature of things. The most
perfect instrument is one most easily thrown out of adjustment. The most
highly developed organism is the most exactly fitted to its functions,
the one most deeply injured when these functions are altered or
suppressed.

Man's sensations and power to act must go together. Man can know nothing
that he cannot somehow weave into action. If he fails to do this in one
form or another, it is through limitations he has placed on himself. Man
cannot suffer for lack of "more worlds to conquer," because his power to
conquer worlds is the product of his own 'past life and his own past
needs. To weave knowledge into action is the antidote for ennui. To
plan, to hope, to do, to accomplish the full measure of our powers,
whatever they may be, is to turn away from Nirvana to real life. A
useful man, a helpful man, an active man in any sense, even though his,
activity be misdirected or harmful, is always a hopeful man.

The feeling that "the only reality in life is pain," is the sign not of
philosophical acuteness but of bodily under-vitalization. The nervous
system is too feeble for the body it has to move. To act is to make the
environment your servant. Its pressure is no longer pain but joy. The
concessions which life has made to time and space are the source of
life's glory and power.

The function of the nervous system is to carry from the environment to
the brain the impressions of truth, that action may be true and safe.
Pain and pleasure are both incidental to sound action. The one drives,
the other coaxes us toward the path of wisdom. If pain is in excess of
joy in our experience, it is because we have wandered from the path of
normal activity. By right-doing, we mean that action which makes for
"abundance of life," and abundance of life means fulness of joy. "Though
life be sad, yet there's joy in the living it" was the word of the
ancient Greeks, "who ever with a frolic welcome took the Thunder and the
Sunshine."

The life of man is dynamic, not static; not a condition but a movement.
"Not enjoyment and not sorrow" is its end or justification. It is a rush
of forces, an evolution towards greater activities and higher
adjustment, the growth of a stability which shall be ever more unstable.
This onward motion is recognized in the pessimistic philosophy of Von
Hartmann, as a movement towards ever greater possibilities of pain. With
him life is "the supreme blunder of the blind unconscious force" which
created man and developed him as the prey of ever-increasing suffering.

But the power to enjoy has grown in like degree, and both joy and pain
are subordinated to the power to act. The human will, the power to do,
is the real end of the stress and struggle of the ages. However limited
its individual action, the will finds its place among the gigantic
factors in the evolution of life. It is not the present, but the
ultimate, which is truth. Not the unstable and temporary fact but the
boundless clashing forces which endlessly throw truths to the surface.

Another source of Pessimism is the reaction from unearned pleasures and
from spurious joys. It is the business of the senses to translate
realities, to tell the truth about us in terms of human experience.
Every real pleasure has its cost in some form of nervous activity. What
we get we must earn, if it is to be really ours. Long ago, in the
infancy of civilization, man learned that there were drugs in Nature,
cell products of the growth or transformation of "our brother organisms,
the plants," by whose agency pain was turned to pleasure. By the aid of
these outside influences he could clear "today of past regrets and
future fears," and strike out from the sad "calendar unborn tomorrow and
dead yesterday."

That the joys thus produced had no real objective existence, man was not
long in finding out, and it soon appeared that for each subjective
pleasure which had no foundation in action, there was a subjective
sorrow, likewise unrelated to external things.

But that the pains more than balanced the joys, and that the indulgence
in unearned deceptions destroyed sooner or later all capacity for
enjoyment, man learned more slowly.

The joys of wine, of opium, of tobacco and of all kindred drugs are mere
tricks upon the nervous system. In greater or less degree they destroy
its power to tell the truth, and in proportion as they have seemed to
bring subjective happiness, so do they bring at last subjective horror
and disgust. And this utter soul-weariness of drugs has found its way
into literature as the expression of Pessimism.

"The City of the Dreadful Night," for example, does not find its
inspiration in the misery of selfish, rushing, crowded London. It is the
effect of brandy on the sensitive mind of an exquisitive poet. Not the
world, but the poet, lies in the "dreadful night" of self-inflicted
insomnia. Wherever these subjective nerve influences find expression in
literature it is either in an infinite sadness, or in hopeless gloom.
James Thompson says in the "City of the Dreadful Night":

  "The city is of night but not of sleep;
  There sweet sleep is not for the weary brain.
  The pitiless hours like years and ages creep--
  A night seems termless hell. This dreadful strain
  Of thought and consciousness which never ceases,
  Or which some moment's stupor but increases."

  * * *

  "This Time which crawleth like a monstrous snake,
  Wounded and slow and very venomous."

  * * *

  'Lo, as thus prostrate in the dust I write
  My heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears--
  But why evoke the spectres of black night
  To blot the sunshine of exultant years!

  "Because a cold rage seizes one at times
  To show the bitter, old and wrinkled truth,
  Stripped naked of all vesture that beguiles
  False dreams, false hopes, false masks and modes of youth."

All this, alas, is the inevitable physical outcome of the attempt to--

  "Divorce old, barren Reason from my house
  To take the daughter of the vine to spouse."

All subjective happiness due to nerve stimulation is of the nature of
mania. In proportion to its intensity is the certainty that it will be
followed by its subjective reaction, the "Nuit Blanche," the "dark brown
taste," by the experience of "the difference in the morning." The only
melancholy drugs can drive away is that which they themselves produce.
It is folly to use as a source of pleasure that which lessens activity
and vitiates life.

There are many other causes which induce depression of mind and disorder
of nerve. Where nerve decay is associated with genius and culture, we
shall find some phase of the philosophy of Pessimism. In fact,
cheerfulness is not primarily a result of right thinking, but rather the
expression of sound nerves and normal vegetative processes. Most of the
philosophy of despair, the longing to know the meaning of the
unattainable, vanishes with active out-of-door life and the consequent
flow of good health. Even a dose of quinine may convert to hopefulness
when both sermons and arguments fail.

For a degree of optimism is a necessary accompaniment of health. It is
as natural as animal heat, and is the mental reflex of it. Pessimism
arises from depression or irritation or failure of the nerves. It is a
symptom of lowered vitality expressed in terms of the mind.

There is a philosophical Pessimism, as I have already said, over and
above all merely physical conditions, and not dependent on them. But the
melancholy Jacques of our ordinary experience either uses some narcotic
or stimulant to excess, or else has trouble with his liver or kidneys.
"Liver complaint," says Zangwill, "is the Prometheus myth done into
modern English." Already historical criticism has shown that the Bloody
Assizes had its origin in disease of the bladder, and most forms of vice
and cruelty resolve themselves into decay of the nerves. It is natural
that degeneration should bring discouragement and disgust. But whatever
the causes of Pessimism, whether arising in speculative philosophy in
nervous disease or in personal failure, it can never be wrought into
sound and helpful life. To live effectively implies the belief that life
is worth living, and no one who leads a worthy life has ever for a
moment doubted this.

Such an expression as "worth living" has in fact no real meaning. To act
and to love are the twin functions of the human body and soul. To refuse
these functions is to make one's self incapable of them. It is in a
sense to die while the body is still alive. To refuse these functions is
to make misery out of existence, and a life of ennui is doubtless not
"worth living."

The philosophy of life is its working hypothesis of action. To hold that
all effort is futile, that all knowledge is illusion, and that no result
of the human will is worth the pain of calling it into action, is to cut
the nerve of effectiveness. In proportion as one really believes this,
he becomes a cumberer of the ground. It was said of Oscar McCulloch, an
earnest student of human life, that "in whatever part of God's universe
he finds himself, he will be a hopeful man, looking forward and not
backward, looking upward and not downward, always ready to lend a
helping hand, and not afraid to die."

Of like spirit was Robert Louis Stevenson:

  "Glad did I live and gladly die,
  And I laid me down with a will."

It is through men of this type that the work of civilization has been
accomplished, "men of present valor, stalwart, brave iconoclasts." They
were men who were content with the order of the universe as it is, and
seek only to place their own actions in harmony with this order. They
have no complaints to urge against "the goodness and severity of God,"
nor any futile wish "to remould it nearer to the heart's desire." The
"Fanaticism for Veracity" is satisfied with what is. Not the ultimate
truth which is God's alone, but the highest attainable truth, is the aim
of Science, and to translate Science into Virtue is the goal of
civilization.

The third question which Science may ask is the direct one. In what part
of the universe are you, and what are you doing? Thoreau says that
"there is no hope for you unless this bit of sod under your feet is the
sweetest to you in this world--in any world." Why not? Nowhere is the
sky so blue, the grass so green, the sunshine so bright, the shade so
welcome, as right here, now, today. No other blue sky, nor bright
sunshine, nor welcome shade exists for you. Other skies are bright to
other men. They have been bright in the past and so will they be again,
but yours are here and now. Today is your day and mine, the only day we
have, the day in which we play our part. What our part may signify in
the great whole we may not understand, but we are here to play it, and
now is the time. This we know, it is a part of action, not of whining.
It is a part of love, not cynicism. It is for us to express love in
terms of human helpfulness. This we know, for we have learned from sad
experience that any other course of life leads toward decay and waste.

What, then, are you doing under these blue skies? The thing you do
should be for you the most important thing in the world. If you could do
something better than you are doing now, everything considered, why are
you not doing it?

If every one did the very best he knew, most of the problems of human
life would be already settled. If each one did the best he knew, he
would be on the highway to greater knowledge, and therefore still better
action. The redemption of the world is waiting only for each man to
"lend a hand."

It does not matter if the greatest thing for you to do be not in itself
great. The best preparation for greatness comes in doing faithfully the
little things that lie nearest. The nearest is the greatest in most
human lives.

Even washing one's own face may be the greatest present duty. The
ascetics of the past, who scorned cleanliness in the search for
godliness, became, sometimes, neither clean nor holy. For want of a
clean face they lost their souls.

It was Agassiz's strength that he knew the value of today. Never were
such bright skies as arched above him; nowhere else were such charming
associates, such budding students, such secrets of nature fresh to his
hand. His was the buoyant strength of the man who can look the stars in
the face because he does his part in the Universe as well as they do
theirs. It is the fresh, unspoiled confidence of the natural man, who
finds the world a world of action and joy, and time all too short for
the fulness of life which it demands. When Agassiz died, "the best
friend that ever student had," the students of Harvard "laid a wreath of
laurel on his bier, and their manly voices sang a requiem, for he had
been a student all his life long, and when he died he was younger than
any of them."

Optimism in life is a good working hypothesis, if by optimism we mean
the open-eyed faith that force exerted is never lost. Much that calls
itself faith is only the blindness of self-satisfaction.

What if there are so many of us in the ranks of humanity? What if the
individual be lost in the mass as a pebble cast into the Seven Seas?
Would you choose a world so small as to leave room for only you and your
satellites? Would you ask for problems of life so tame that even you
could grasp them? Would you choose a fibreless Universe to be "remoulded
nearer to the heart's desire," in place of the wild, tough, virile,
man-making environment from which the Attraction of Gravitation lets
none of us escape?

It is not that "I come like water and like wind I go." I am here today,
and the moment and the place are real, and my will is itself one of the
fates that make and unmake all things. "Every meanest day is the
conflux of two eternities," and in this center of all time and space for
the moment it is I that stand. Great is Eternity, but it is made up of
time. Could we blot out one day in the midst of time, Eternity could be
no more. The feebleness of man has its place within the infinite
Omnipotence.

It is a question not of hope or despair, but of truth, not of optimism
nor of Pessimism, but of wisdom. Wisdom is knowing what to do next;
virtue is doing it. Religion is the heart impulse that turns toward the
best and highest course of action. "It was my duty to have loved the
highest. What does that demand? What have I to do next? Not in infinity,
where we can do nothing, but here, today, the greatest day that ever
was, for it alone is mine!

What matter is it that time does not end with us? Neither with us does
history begin. An Emperor of China once decreed that nothing should be
before him, that all history should begin with him. But he could go no
farther than his own decree. Who are you that would be Emperor of China?

  "The eternal Saki from that bowl hath poured
  Millions of bubbles like us and shall pour."

Why not? Should life stop with you? What have you done that you should
mark the end of time? If you have played your part in the procession of
bubbles, all is well, though the best you can do is to leave the world a
little better for the next that follows.

If you have not made life a little richer and its conditions a little
more just by your living you have not touched the world. You are indeed
a bubble. If some kind friend somewhere "turn down an empty glass," it
will be the best monument you deserve. But to have had a friend is to
leave the glass not wholly empty, for life is justified in love as well
as in action.

The words of Omar need to be read with the rising inflection, and they
become the expression of exultant hopefulness.

  "The eternal Saki from that bowl hath poured
  Millions of bubbles and shall pour!"

Small though we are the story is not all told when we are dead. The huge
procession goes on and shall go on, till the secret of the grand
symphony of life is reached.

  "A single note in the Eternal Song
  A perfect Singer hath had need for me."

  * * *

  "I do rejoice that when of Thee and Me
  Men speak no longer, yet not less but more
  The Eternal Saki still that bowl shall fill
  And ever fairer, clearer bubbles pour."

In the same way we must read with the rising inflection the lines of
Tennyson:

  "I falter when I firmly trod,
  And falling with my weight of cares,
  Upon the World's great altar-stairs
  That slope through darkness, up to god!"

Read these words with courage, and with the upward turn of the voice at
the end. It is no longer in the darkness that we falter. The great
altar-stairs of which no man knows the beginning nor the end, do not
spring from the mire nor end in the mists. They "slope through darkness
up to God," and no one could ask a stronger expression of that robust
optimism which must be the mainspring of successful life.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Philosophy of Despair, by David Starr Jordan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILOSOPHY OF DESPAIR ***

***** This file should be named 4754-8.txt or 4754-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/5/4754/

Produced by David A. Schwan.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
